Mcmchris/edge control/smart irrigation system (#1070)
arduino/docs-content: content/hardware/05.pro-solutions/solutions-and-kits/edge-control/tutorials/smart-irrigation-system/content.md

---

> title: 'Smart Irrigation System Using Edge Control'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: 'Smart Irrigation System Using Arduino Edge Control'
```

description: "This application note describes how to control a four zones irrigation system using the Edge Control and the Arduino IoT Cloud."
difficulty: intermediate
tags:
  - Irrigation System
  - Arduino Edge Control

>   - MKR WiFi 1010

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Arduino MKR WiFi 1010
```

  - name: ArduinoJson
    url: https://github.com/bblanchon/ArduinoJson
  - name: ArduinoIoTCloud
    url: https://github.com/arduino-libraries/ArduinoIoTCloud  
software:
  - ide-v1
  - ide-v2
  - web-editor
  - iot-cloud
  - arduino-agent
hardware:
  - hardware/05.pro-solutions/boards/solutions-and-kits/edge-control
  - hardware/05.pro-solutions/boards/solutions-and-kits/enclosure-kit
  - hardware/01.mkr/01.boards/mkr-wifi-1010
---

## Introduction

The health of our crops depends on being able to provide favorable environmental conditions for their proper development. Among the most important factors is irrigation, water allows the assimilation and transport of nutrients in plants, among many other things vital to life.

![Project final result](assets/Thumbnail-green.png)

Smart farming is more accessible today than ever by using the Arduino series of professional solutions. Taking advantage of the control capabilities and sensor data analysis, Arduino Edge Control is perfect for managing our crops.

The project shown is intended to replicate a scale smart farming application, it can be implemented on real agriculture fields using the same hardware and firmware.

## Goals

> The goal of this application note is to showcase a smart farming irrigation system using a combination of an Arduino Edge Control, an MKR WiFi 1010, and the Arduino IoT Cloud. The project's objectives are the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of this application note is to showcase a smart farming irrigation system using a combination of an Edge Control, an MKR WiFi 1010, and the Arduino IoT Cloud. The project's objectives are the following:
```

- Independently control 4 irrigation zones using motorized ball valves.
- Get water from a smart tank with water level monitoring.
- Program irrigation timers from remote through Arduino IoT Cloud by using WiFi connectivity.
- Manually activate irrigation from Arduino IoT Cloud through dedicated widgets.
- Monitor average irrigation time and water consumption on dedicated charts on Arduino IoT Cloud.

> - Provide a weather station on Arduino Cloud, using API connected to a weather website to decide on whether to irrigate or not.

Reviewer: Do you mean "Arduino IoT Cloud" here?

## Hardware and Software Requirements

![Project main hardware and materials](assets/hardware.png)

### Hardware Requirements
- Arduino Edge Control

> - MKR WiFi 1010

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Arduino MKR WiFi 1010
```

- Arduino Edge Control Enclosure Kit
- 4-20mA Liquid Level Sensor
- 4x 2 Wires Motorized ball Valves (3 Wires version are also supported)
- 11' of 1/2" PVC pipes
- 3x 1/2" PVC TEE
- 8x 1/2" PVC elbow
- 1/2" Manual Valve
- 4x 1/2" PVC caps
- 11x 1/2" PVC male adapters
- 7x 1/2" wall pipe brackets
- 4x Rectangular planters
- DIN rail
- 6x Cable glands
- 20' Duplex cable AWG 18
- Electrical Register Box
- Water Tank

### Software Requirements

- [Arduino IDE 1.8.10+](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software), [Arduino IDE 2](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software), or [Arduino Web Editor](https://create.arduino.cc/editor).
- If you are going to use an offline Arduino IDE, you must install the following libraries: `Arduino_EdgeControl`, `ArduinoIoTCloud`, `Arduino_JSON`, `ArduinoJson`, `ArduinoHttpClient` and `Arduino_ConnectionsHandler`. You can install them using the Arduino IDE Library Manager.
- The [smart irrigation system codes](assets/Edge-Control_MKR_Codes.zip).

> - [Arduino Create Agent](https://create.arduino.cc/getting-started/plugin/welcome) to add the Portenta H7 to the IoT Cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Arduino Create Agent](https://create.arduino.cc/getting-started/plugin/welcome) to add the Arduino Portenta H7 to the Arduino IoT Cloud.
```

## Smart Irrigation System Setup

The electrical connections of the intended application are shown in the diagram below:

![Electrical connections of the irrigation system](assets/wiring-diagram-1.png)

The Arduino Edge Control board will be powered with an external 12V DC power supply connected to BATT+ and GND of J11 respectively.

> The four motorized ball valves will be connected to the Arduino Edge Control Latching outputs of J9 connector from OUT0 to OUT6.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The four motorized ball valves will be connected to the Edge Control Latching outputs of J9 connector from OUT0 to OUT6.
```

The water level transmitter will be connected to +19V reference and 4-20mA input 1 of J7 connector.

![Project physical connections](assets/connections-labeled.png)

## Smart Irrigation System Overview

The irrigation system works as a whole, integrating the level measurement, and the control of the valves with the Arduino Edge Control, together with the communication with the cloud using the MKR Wi-Fi 1010.

The Edge Control is responsible for keeping time with its integrated Real Time Clock, in order to time the use of the valves and know when a day has passed. In addition, it measures the level of the stored water with a 4-20mA liquid level transmitter to calculate its use. It controls at the same time an LCD screen where the status of the valves and timers is shown, and it also allows to manual control of the valves through the LCD push button.

> For communication with the cloud, the MKR WiFi 1010 serves as a bridge, it notifies the Edge Control of any changes in the cloud to activate, deactivate or configure a timer to the valves, in addition, it reports the values of the Edge Control sensors to the Cloud. The communication between both is by I2C.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For communication with the cloud, the MKR WiFi 1010 serves as a bridge, it notifies the Edge Control of any changes in the cloud to activate, deactivate or configure a timer to the valves, in addition, it reports the values of the Edge Control sensors to the cloud. The communication between both is by I2C.
```

> Valves Control

Reviewer: @mcmchris you could use a h3 for these sections if you want 👍🏼

If a valve is activated from the cloud, the message "opening valve" will appear on the screen at the same time that it is being activated. If the valve is activated by a cloud timer, the display will show the same message, including a countdown of the remaining irrigation time. The valves working time is reported to the cloud for a visualization of the daily use average.

Water Usage

> Regarding the use of water, at the system startup, the current amount of water is measured and saved, in this way any decrease in it is translated as a use, the use of water is daily reset to have an average daily use graph in the Cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regarding the use of water, at the system startup, the current amount of water is measured and saved, in this way any decrease in it is translated as a use, the use of water is daily reset to have an average daily use graph in the cloud.
```

Weather Forecast Consideration

Regarding the weather, the MKR WiFi 1010 requires the forecast of the city's weather using the OpenWeather API, if the probability of rain is greater than 90%, the automatic watering timers will be ignored, however, it will be possible to continue watering manually if the user so wishes.

### Arduino Edge Control Code

We will go through some important code sections to make this application fully operative. We will begin with the required libraries:

> - Including `Arduino_EdgeControl.h` will enable the support for the Arduino Edge Control board peripherals, install it by searching for it on the Library Manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Including `Arduino_EdgeControl.h` will enable the support for the Edge Control board peripherals, install it by searching for it on the Library Manager.
```

Reviewer: You could also prefereably remove the word "board" here if it is not needed.

> - Including `Wire.h` will enable the I2C communication needed between the Edge Control, the MKR and the other peripherals, it's included in the BSP of the Arduino Edge Control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Including `Wire.h` will enable the I2C communication needed between the Edge Control, the MKR WiFi 1010 and the other peripherals, it's included in the BSP of the Edge Control.
```

There are two headers included in the project code that handles some helper functions and structures:

> - `SensorValues.hpp` handles the shared variables between the Arduino Edge Control and the MKR WiFi 1010 through I2C.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `SensorValues.hpp` handles the shared variables between the Edge Control and the MKR WiFi 1010 through I2C.
```

> - `helpers.h` handles the Real Time Clock functions to retrieve the local date and time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `helpers.h` handles the real-time clock functions to retrieve the local date and time.
```

Here is also defined a structure to handle the number of button taps to control each valve manually.

```arduino

#include "Helpers.h"
#include <Arduino_EdgeControl.h>
#include <Wire.h>
#include "SensorValues.hpp"

// The MKR1 board I2C address
#define EDGE_I2C_ADDR 0x05

/** UI Management **/
// Button statuses
enum ButtonStatus : byte {
  ZERO_TAP,
  SINGLE_TAP,
  DOUBLE_TAP,
  TRIPLE_TAP,
  QUAD_TAP,
  FIVE_TAP,
  LOT_OF_TAPS
};

```

> In order to save energy and resources, the Arduino Edge Control has different power lines that must be enabled so we can power the different internal and external peripherals. In this case, we need to enable the 3.3v, 5v, Battery, MKR1 slot, and the +19v reference for the 4-20mA sensor's current loop. To handle all the IOs we also need to initialize the IO Expander, together with the Enclosure Kit LCD and the sensors inputs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to save energy and resources, the Edge Control has different power lines that must be enabled so we can power the different internal and external peripherals. In this case, we need to enable the 3.3v, 5v, Battery, MKR1 slot, and the +19v reference for the 4-20mA sensor's current loop. To handle all the IOs we also need to initialize the IO Expander, together with the Enclosure Kit LCD and the sensors inputs. 
```

> With the `setSystemClock` function, we define a starting date reference for the Real Time Clock, and if you need to configure the RTC time with your time zone, use the commented function `RealTimeClock.setEpoch(<Your region unixTime>)` replacing the parameter with your region unix time in seconds. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the `setSystemClock` function, we define a starting date reference for the real-time clock, and if you need to configure the RTC time with your time zone, use the commented function `RealTimeClock.setEpoch(<Your region unixTime>)` replacing the parameter with your region unix time in seconds. 
```

  Serial.println("Init begin");

  // Enable power lines
  Power.enable3V3();
  Power.enable5V();
  Power.on(PWR_3V3);
  Power.on(PWR_VBAT);
  Power.on(PWR_MKR1);
  delay(5000);    // wait for the MKR board to boot
  Power.on(PWR_19V);

  // Init Edge Control IO Expander
  Serial.print("IO Expander initializazion ");
  if (!Expander.begin()) {
    Serial.println("failed.");
    Serial.println("Please, be sure to enable gated 3V3 and 5V power rails");
    Serial.println("via Power.enable3V3() and Power.enable5V().");
  } else Serial.println("succeeded.");

  // LCD button definition
  pinMode(POWER_ON, INPUT);
  attachInterrupt(POWER_ON, buttonPress, RISING);

  // Arduino Edge Control ports init
  Input.begin();
  Input.enable();
  Latching.begin();

  analogReadResolution(adcResolution);

  setSystemClock(__DATE__, __TIME__);  // define system time as a reference for the RTC

  //RealTimeClock.setEpoch(1684803771-(3600*4));  // use this to set the RTC time once.

  // Init the LCD display
  LCD.begin(16, 2);
  LCD.backlight();

  LCD.home();
  LCD.print("Smart Irrigation");
  LCD.setCursor(5, 1);
  LCD.print("System");
  delay(2000);

  LCD.clear();
}
```

> Repetitively the Arduino Edge Control will be detecting button taps for the valve's manual control and handle the right action with a switch case that can recognize from zero to five button taps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Repetitively the Edge Control will be detecting button taps for the valve's manual control and handle the right action with a switch case that can recognize from zero to five button taps.
```

The `updateSensors()` function send the local sensor's values and valves statuses and also requests the updated status of externally controlled variables from the Cloud. 

> To measure the water level we are using a 4-20mA 0 to 1 meter sensor, the Arduino Edge Control converts the current from the sensor loop into a voltage by using an internal 220 ohms resistor to be read by the Analog to Digital Converter (ADC), to convert this voltage back to a current value, we divide by 220 and following the characteristic equation of a 4-20mA sensor `y = 16x + 4`, we solve for x, `x = (y - 4)/16` with a result in meters for x, as we are working on a centimeters range we multiply by 100 resulting on `x = (y - 4)*(100/16) = (y - 4)*6.25` this is the brief explanation of the mathematical expression we use to convert voltage into centimeters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To measure the water level we are using a 4-20mA 0 to 1 meter sensor, the Edge Control converts the current from the sensor loop into a voltage by using an internal 220 ohms resistor to be read by the analog-to-digital converter (ADC), to convert this voltage back to a current value, we divide by 220 and following the characteristic equation of a 4-20mA sensor `y = 16x + 4`, we solve for x, `x = (y - 4)/16` with a result in meters for x, as we are working on a centimeters range we multiply by 100 resulting on `x = (y - 4)*(100/16) = (y - 4)*6.25` this is the brief explanation of the mathematical expression we use to convert voltage into centimeters.
```

      buttonStatus = ZERO_TAP;
      break;

    case QUAD_TAP:  // will execute when the button is pressed four times.
      Serial.println("Quad Tap");
      vals.z4_local = !vals.z4_local;
      sendValues(&vals);
      buttonStatus = ZERO_TAP;
      break;

    case FIVE_TAP:  // will execute when the button is pressed five times.
      Serial.println("Five Tap");
      LCD.backlight();
      LCD.home();
      
      break;

    default:
      Serial.println("Too Many Taps");
      buttonStatus = ZERO_TAP;
      break;
  }

  // reset the valves accumuldated on time every day at midnight
  if (getLocalhour() == " 00:00:00") {
    Serial.println("Resetting accumulators every day");
    vals.z1_on_time = 0;
    vals.z2_on_time = 0;
    vals.z3_on_time = 0;
    vals.z4_on_time = 0;
    delay(1000);
  }

  unsigned long currentMillis = millis();

  if (currentMillis - previousMillis >= interval) {

    previousMillis = currentMillis;

    //Serial.println(getLocalhour());

    // send local sensors values and retrieve cloud variables status back and forth
    updateSensors();
  }

  // activate, deactivate and keep time of valves function
  valvesHandler();
}

```

> ### MKR WiFi 1010 Code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Arduino MKR WiFi 1010 Code
```

The MKR WiFi 1010 needs the following libraries:

> - `ArduinoIoTCloud.h` This one handles the Arduino Cloud connection and project variables publishing. It can be installed directly from the Arduino Library Manager.

Reviewer: Do you mean "Arduino IoT Cloud" here instead of "Arduino Cloud"?

- `Arduino_ConnectionHandler.h` This one manages the Wi-Fi® connection and can be installed directly from the Arduino Library Manager.
- `ArduinoJson.h` and `Arduino_JSON` This one let us parse and create JSON structures for the HTTP requests. They can be installed directly from the Arduino Library Manager.
- `ArduinoHttpClient.h` This library lets us request weather data from the Open Weather API. It can be installed directly from the Arduino Library Manager.

> - `Wire.h` will enable the I2C communication needed between the Edge Control, the MKR and the other peripherals, it's included in the BSP of the MKR WiFi board.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Wire.h` will enable the I2C communication needed between the Edge Control, the MKR WiFi 1010 and the other peripherals, it's included in the BSP of the MKR WiFi board.
```

> - `utility/wifi_drv.h` This library lets us control the MKR built-in RGB LED, it's included in the BSP of the MKR WiFi board.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `utility/wifi_drv.h` This library lets us control the MKR built-in RGB LED, it's included in the BSP of the MKR WiFi 1010 board.
```

There are two headers included in the project code that handles some helper functions and structures:

- `thingProperties.h` This is automatically generated by the Arduino Cloud, however, if you are using an offline IDE verify it's in the same directory as your sketch, it includes all the Arduino IoT Cloud variables.
- `SensorValues.hpp` handles the shared variables between the Arduino Edge Control and the MKR WiFi 1010 through I2C.

> In the global variables, we define the MKR board I2C address (it must be the same as defined in the Edge Control code), also, we define the water tank dimensions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the global variables, we define the MKR WiFi 1010 board I2C address (it must be the same as defined in the Edge Control code), also, we define the water tank dimensions.
```

```arduino
#include "thingProperties.h"
#include <ArduinoJson.h>
#include <Wire.h>
#include "SensorValues.hpp"
#include <utility/wifi_drv.h>
#include <ArduinoHttpClient.h>
#include <Arduino_JSON.h>

// The MKR1 board I2C address
#define SELF_I2C_ADDR 0x05

// Water tank constants
#define PI 3.1415926535897932384626433832795
#define radius 0.28  // in meters
```

To properly retrieve weather information from the [Open Weather API](https://home.openweathermap.org/users/sign_in), you must create an account to use it, there you will find a unique API Key needed to format your HTTP requests.

Replace the `city` and `countryCode` variables with yours.

```arduino
// OpenWeather server address:
const char serverAddress[] = "api.openweathermap.org";
int port = 443;

// Your OpenWeather API Key
String openWeatherMapApiKey = "<API Key>";

// Replace with your country code and city
String city = "Santiago de los Caballeros";
String countryCode = "DO";
```

> Repetitively the MKR WiFi 1010 update its connection with the Arduino IoT Cloud, and checks for changes on every variable, from the valves switches to the scheduled activated timers. It shows when it's successfully connected to the cloud by turning on its blue LED. Also, it asks for a weather forecast every 10 minutes to update the temperature, humidity and rain probability in the Cloud dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Repetitively the MKR WiFi 1010 update its connection with the Arduino IoT Cloud, and checks for changes on every variable, from the valves switches to the scheduled activated timers. It shows when it's successfully connected to the cloud by turning on its blue LED. Also, it asks for a weather forecast every 10 minutes to update the temperature, humidity and rain probability in the Arduino IoT Cloud dashboard.
```

The `uploadValues(SensorValues_t *vals)` is executed every time the Edge Control requests data through I2C from the MKR. It updates all the local and Cloud shared variables to be sent, also it converts the water level variable to water volume using the cylinder volume formula `v = πr²h` where `r` is the tank radius in meters and `h` is the tank height in millimeters so the volume result is in liters.

Using flow control variables we store the initial water level as a reference point, any level measured below that point will be considered as water use updating the `water_usage` variable, if we refill the tank, it will save the higher value of water level as a new reference point.

```arduino
  water_level = vals->water_level_local;
  water_volume = PI * (radius) * (radius) * (int)water_level * 10;

  if (waterCtrl == 0) {
    currentWater = water_volume;
    Serial.println("Initial Water Volumen: ");
    Serial.println(currentWater);
    water_usage = 0;
    waterCtrl = 1;
  }

  if (water_volume < currentWater) {
    water_usage += currentWater - water_volume;
    currentWater = water_volume;
  } else if (water_volume > currentWater) {
    currentWater = water_volume;
  }
```

> ### The Cloud Dashboard

Reviewer: Please check this spelling in the whole of this section, to specify if you mean the "Arduino IoT Cloud" 🙏🏼

![Arduino Cloud project dashboard on a smartphone](assets/dashboard-cel.png)

We can easily access this dashboard from a PC, mobile phone or tablet from anywhere, receiving an instantaneous update wherever we are.

## Full Smart Irrigation System Example

All the necessary files to replicate this application note can be found below:

- The complete code can be downloaded [here](assets/Edge-Control_MKR_Codes.zip)

### Project Working Images

![Zone 1 manual irrigation](assets/manual-irrigation.png)
![Automatic irrigation timer countdown in zone 2 (1.4 minutes left)](assets/timer-LCD.png)
![Zone 2 after the motorized valve is opened](assets/zone2.png)
![Zone 2 automatic irrigation](assets/irrigation-process.jpg)
![Irrigation in all zones](assets/4zones.gif)

## Conclusion

> In this application note, we have learned how to build a smart irrigation system to water our crops automatically, manually and remotely, also analyzing the weather to avoid irrigation when it's raining so we can save water, using an Arduino Edge Control allows us to easily implement this kind of agriculture systems ready for field deployment. It is known that normally in remote areas we don't have WiFi access but this is to showcase the Edge Control capabilities to connect to the Cloud and be remotely controlled. The Arduino Pro product series is a great choice to develop robust and industrial environment proof solutions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this application note, we have learned how to build a smart irrigation system to water our crops automatically, manually and remotely, also analyzing the weather to avoid irrigation when it's raining so we can save water, using an Arduino Edge Control allows us to easily implement this kind of agriculture systems ready for field deployment. It is known that normally in remote areas we don't have Wi-Fi® access but this is to showcase the Edge Control capabilities to connect to the cloud and be remotely controlled. The Arduino Pro product series is a great choice for developing robust and industrial environment-proof solutions.
```

- Electrical Register Box
- Water Tank

### Software Requirements

- [Arduino IDE 1.8.10+](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software), [Arduino IDE 2](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software), or [Arduino Web Editor](https://create.arduino.cc/editor).
- If you are going to use an offline Arduino IDE, you must install the following libraries: `Arduino_EdgeControl`, `ArduinoIoTCloud`, `Arduino_JSON`, `ArduinoJson`, `ArduinoHttpClient` and `Arduino_ConnectionsHandler`. You can install them using the Arduino IDE Library Manager.
- The [smart irrigation system codes](assets/Edge-Control_MKR_Codes.zip).
- [Arduino Create Agent](https://create.arduino.cc/getting-started/plugin/welcome) to add the Arduino Portenta H7 to the Arduino IoT Cloud.

## Smart Irrigation System Setup

The electrical connections of the intended application are shown in the diagram below:

![Electrical connections of the irrigation system](assets/wiring-diagram-1.png)

The Edge Control board will be powered with an external 12V DC power supply connected to BATT+ and GND of J11 respectively.
The four motorized ball valves will be connected to the Edge Control Latching outputs of J9 connector from OUT0 to OUT6.

> The water level transmitter will be connected to the +19V reference and the 4-20mA input number 1 of the J7 connector.

Reviewer 2: The connection diagram with a brief explanation looks good to me. It is using 2-wire motorized valve, but I think it could be nice to include this [Connecting and Controlling a Motorized Ball Valve tutorial](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/edge-control/motorized-ball-valve) as a reference (3-wire use case) for the users. Also, as an additional suggestion, I think it could be nice to "magnify" the connection diagram, especially for 2-wire valve, to explicitly show the connection setup.

Author: I added the reference to the 3 wires guide. Just left pending to add the connection close up picture.

```arduino
/*
  Since Z1 is READ_WRITE variable, onZ1Change() is
  executed every time a new value is received from IoT Cloud.
*/
void onZ1Change() {
  // Add your code here to act upon Z1 change
  Serial.println("Z1 changed!!");
  SensorValues_t vals;
  vals.z1_local = z1;
  delay(1000);
}
```

The `uploadValues(SensorValues_t *vals)` is executed every time the Edge Control requests data through I2C from the MKR. It updates all the local and Cloud shared variables to be sent, also it converts the water level variable to water volume using the cylinder volume formula `v = πr²h` where `r` is the tank radius in meters and `h` is the tank height in millimeters so the volume result is in liters.

Using flow control variables we store the initial water level as a reference point, any level measured below that point will be considered as water use updating the `water_usage` variable, if we refill the tank, it will save the higher value of water level as a new reference point.

```arduino
  water_level = vals->water_level_local;

>   water_volume = PI * (radius) * (radius) * (int)water_level * 10;

Reviewer 2: Here I would like to suggest a review of used measurement units within how it's processed inside the code, as I think I'm seeing something weird. Maybe it could use additional information if applicable to explain the unit measurements are processed adequately inside the code.

Author: I tried to explain it better and update the code expression. Let me know if it's clear enough now.

---
title: 'Smart Irrigation System Using Arduino® Edge Control'
description: "This application note describes how to control a four zones irrigation system using the Edge Control and the Arduino IoT Cloud."
difficulty: intermediate
tags:
  - Irrigation System
  - Arduino Edge Control
  - Arduino MKR WiFi 1010
  - Motorized Valve
  - 4-20mA Sensors
  - Arduino IoT Cloud
  - Application Note
author: 'Christopher Mendez'
libraries:
  - name: Arduino_EdgeControl
    url: https://github.com/arduino-libraries/Arduino_EdgeControl
  - name: ArduinoHTTPClient
    url: https://github.com/arduino-libraries/ArduinoHttpClient
  - name: Arduino_JSON
    url: https://github.com/arduino-libraries/Arduino_JSON
  - name: Arduino_ConnectionsHandler
    url: https://github.com/arduino-libraries/Arduino_ConnectionHandler
  - name: ArduinoJson
    url: https://github.com/bblanchon/ArduinoJson
  - name: ArduinoIoTCloud
    url: https://github.com/arduino-libraries/ArduinoIoTCloud  
software:
  - ide-v1
  - ide-v2
  - web-editor
  - iot-cloud
  - arduino-agent
hardware:

>   - hardware/05.pro-solutions/boards/solutions-and-kits/edge-control

Author: I noticed that too.

>   - hardware/05.pro-solutions/boards/solutions-and-kits/edge-control

Reviewer: Could it be that there is an extra "boards" in the link? Should it not be `hardware/05.pro-solutions/solutions-and-kits/edge-control`?

>   - hardware/05.pro-solutions/boards/solutions-and-kits/edge-control

Reviewer 3: the point is that the product to talk about is:

edge control
edge control enclosure
MKR wifi 1010

so... no idea

  - hardware/05.pro-solutions/boards/solutions-and-kits/enclosure-kit
  - hardware/01.mkr/01.boards/mkr-wifi-1010
---

## Introduction

The health of our crops depends on being able to provide favorable environmental conditions for their proper development. Among the most important factors is irrigation, water allows the assimilation and transport of nutrients in plants, among many other things vital to life.

![Project final result](assets/Thumbnail-green.png)

Smart farming is more accessible today than ever by using the Arduino series of professional solutions. Taking advantage of the control capabilities and sensor data analysis, Arduino Edge Control is perfect for managing our crops.

> The project shown is intended to replicate a scale smart farming application, it can be implemented on real agriculture fields using the same hardware and firmware.

Reviewer 3: small error by my part, **please don't forget to add the image again**

> The project shown is intended to replicate a scale smart farming application, it can be implemented on real agriculture fields using the same hardware and firmware.

Author: Understood, thanks!

## Goals

The goal of this application note is to showcase a smart farming irrigation system using a combination of an Edge Control, an MKR WiFi 1010, and the Arduino IoT Cloud. The project's objectives are the following:

- Independently control 4 irrigation zones using motorized ball valves.
- Get water from a smart tank with water level monitoring.

> - Program irrigation timers from remote through Arduino IoT Cloud by using WiFi connectivity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Program irrigation timers from remote through Arduino IoT Cloud by using Wi-Fi® connectivity.
```

## Hardware and Software Requirements

![Project main hardware and materials](assets/hardware_16-9.png)

### Hardware Requirements
- Arduino Edge Control
- Arduino MKR WiFi 1010
- Arduino Edge Control Enclosure Kit
- 4-20mA (0-1 meter) Liquid Level Sensor
- 4x 2 Wires Motorized ball Valves (3 Wires version are also supported)
- 12V DC power supply 
- 11' of 1/2" PVC pipes
- 3x 1/2" PVC TEE
- 8x 1/2" PVC elbow
- 1/2" Manual Valve
- 4x 1/2" PVC caps
- 11x 1/2" PVC male adapters
- 7x 1/2" wall pipe brackets
- 4x Rectangular planters
- DIN rail
- 6x Cable glands
- 20' Duplex cable AWG 18
- Electrical Register Box
- Water Tank

### Software Requirements

- [Arduino IDE 1.8.10+](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software), [Arduino IDE 2](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software), or [Arduino Web Editor](https://create.arduino.cc/editor).
- If you are going to use an offline Arduino IDE, you must install the following libraries: `Arduino_EdgeControl`, `ArduinoIoTCloud`, `Arduino_JSON`, `ArduinoJson`, `ArduinoHttpClient` and `Arduino_ConnectionsHandler`. You can install them using the Arduino IDE Library Manager.
- The [smart irrigation system codes](assets/Edge-Control_MKR_Codes.zip).

> - [Arduino Create Agent](https://create.arduino.cc/getting-started/plugin/welcome) to add the Arduino Portenta H7 to the Arduino IoT Cloud.

Author: Ups, fixed!

### Water Usage

Regarding the use of water, at the system startup, the current amount of water is measured and saved, in this way any decrease in it is translated as a use, the use of water is daily reset to have an average daily use graph in the cloud.

### Weather Forecast Consideration

Regarding the weather, the MKR WiFi 1010 requires the forecast of the city's weather using the OpenWeather API, if the probability of rain is greater than 90%, the automatic watering timers will be ignored, however, it will be possible to continue watering manually if the user so wishes.

### Arduino Edge Control Code

We will go through some important code sections to make this application fully operative. We will begin with the required libraries:

- Including `Arduino_EdgeControl.h` will enable the support for the Edge Control peripherals, install it by searching for it on the Library Manager.

> - Including `Wire.h` will enable the I2C communication between the Edge Control, the MKR WiFi 1010 and the other peripherals, it's included in the BSP of the Edge Control.

Author: Board Support Package, this is the board package installed in the IDE.

    if (ArduinoCloud.connected()) {
      WiFiDrv::analogWrite(27, 122);
    } else {
      WiFiDrv::analogWrite(27, 0);
    }
  }

  // doing this just once after there's a WiFi connections
  if (bootForecast == 1 && WiFi.status() == WL_CONNECTED) {
    getForecast();  // request rain probability
    getWeather();   // request temperature and humidity
    bootForecast = 0;
  }

  if (millis() - lastRequest > interval) {
    // request weather variables each interval
    if (WiFi.status() == WL_CONNECTED) {
      getForecast();
      getWeather();
    }
    lastRequest = millis();
  }

  ArduinoCloud.update();
}
```

The system needs to be as fast as possible when a valve activation is requested, this is why there is one function for each valve that is fired once the valve status is changed on the Arduino IoT Cloud.

```arduino
/*
  Since Z1 is READ_WRITE variable, onZ1Change() is
  executed every time a new value is received from IoT Cloud.
*/
void onZ1Change() {
  // Add your code here to act upon Z1 change
  Serial.println("Z1 changed!!");
  SensorValues_t vals;
  vals.z1_local = z1;
  delay(1000);
}
```

> The `uploadValues(SensorValues_t *vals)` is executed every time the Edge Control requests data through I2C from the MKR. It updates all the local and Cloud shared variables to be sent, also it converts the water level variable to water volume using the cylinder volume formula `v = πr²h`, if `r` (tank radius) and `h` (tank height) are in meters the volume result is in cubic meters (m³), for a more intuitive perception of water quantity we will convert it to liters, 1m³ = 1000 L, and as our level sensor output is in centimeters we can convert (height) to meters dividing by 100, resulting on a m³ volume that we just need to multiply by 1000 to convert it to liters. This is the brief why of the expression used in the code:

Reviewer 3: it is so good in any case that we are aware about our random math expressions and magic numbers and the need of explaining them!

![Arduino Cloud project dashboard ](assets/dashboard_16-9.png)

Within the Arduino IoT Cloud's dashboard, the system variables can be monitored and controlled. We have temperature, humidity and rain probability gauges showing the current weather status and forecast, toggle switches to control each motorized valve accompanied by a scheduler widget to set automatic irrigation routines, also we have time series graphs showing the daily activated time of each valve. Finally, there are water supply monitoring widgets, one that shows the current water level in percentage from 0-100%, a water volume widget that shows the remaining liters of water in the tank, and a water usage widget that shows the liters used daily.

![Arduino Cloud project dashboard on a smartphone](assets/dashboard-cel.png)

We can easily access this dashboard from a PC, mobile phone or tablet from anywhere, receiving an instantaneous update wherever we are.

## Full Smart Irrigation System Example

All the necessary files to replicate this application note can be found below:

> - The complete code can be downloaded [here](assets/Edge-Control_MKR_Codes.zip)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The complete code can be downloaded [here](assets/Edge-Control_MKR_Codes.zip).
```

> ### Project Working Images

Reviewer 3: it's great to add the additional media let's try to align better

```suggestion
### The irrigation system working
```

Reviewer 3: Below you can find some additional images and animations showing how the system works:

![Zone 1 manual irrigation](assets/manual-irrigation.png)
![Automatic irrigation timer countdown in zone 2 (1.4 minutes left)](assets/timer-LCD.png)
![Zone 2 after the motorized valve is opened](assets/zone2.png)
![Irrigation in all zones](assets/4zones.gif)

## Conclusion

> In this application note, we have learned how to build a smart irrigation system to water our crops automatically, manually and remotely, also analyzing the weather to avoid irrigation when it's raining so we can save water, using an Arduino Edge Control allows us to easily implement this kind of agriculture systems ready for field deployment. It is known that normally in remote areas we don't have Wi-Fi® access but this is to showcase the Edge Control capabilities to connect to the cloud and be remotely controlled. The Arduino Pro product series is a great choice for developing robust and industrial environment-proof solutions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this application note, we have learned how to build a smart irrigation system to water our crops automatically, manually and remotely. Thanks to real time weather analysis, we can avoid irrigation when it's raining saving water and avoiding over irrigation or flooding problems. 

Arduino Edge Control allows us to easily implement this kind of agriculture systems ready for field deployment. It is known that normally in remote areas Wi-Fi® access is limited by its use is increasing in the creation of new smart farms and the connectivity can be extended using alternatives boards like the Arduino MKR Lora boards.  

Thanks to the Edge Control capabilities to connect to the cloud and be remotely controlled, the Arduino Pro product series is a great choice for developing robust and industrial environment-proof solutions.
```

Reviewer 3: Let's put some oxygen plus some suggestions.

### Next Steps

As you already know how to develop a Smart Irrigation System with Arduino Edge Control and the MKR WiFi 1010, it's time for you to continue exploring all the capabilities of the Arduino Pro environment to integrate it with your professional setup and improve it with powerful solutions.

> You can add different connectivity modules like LoRaWAN®, GSM, RS485 or Ethernet by using the [Arduino MKR family](https://store-usa.arduino.cc/collections/mkr-family)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can add different connectivity modules like LoRaWAN®, GSM, RS-485 or Ethernet by using the [Arduino MKR family](https://store-usa.arduino.cc/collections/mkr-family)
```

  - name: ArduinoJson
    url: https://github.com/bblanchon/ArduinoJson
  - name: ArduinoIoTCloud
    url: https://github.com/arduino-libraries/ArduinoIoTCloud  
software:
  - ide-v1
  - ide-v2
  - web-editor
  - iot-cloud
  - arduino-agent
hardware:
  - hardware/05.pro-solutions/boards/solutions-and-kits/edge-control
  - hardware/05.pro-solutions/boards/solutions-and-kits/enclosure-kit
  - hardware/01.mkr/01.boards/mkr-wifi-1010
---

## Introduction

Agriculture has always been a key part of human development. Humanity is constantly growing and the demand of more efficient, profitable, and green agriculture is one of the challenges that the industry has been working on during the last years.

![Application Note Overview. Each pot represents one individual irrigation zone capable of watering a crop field](assets/Thumbnail-green.png)

Smart farming is one of the most important actors in this revolution and is more accessible today than ever by using the Arduino Pro solutions. Taking advantage of the control capabilities, sensor data analysis and cloud connectivity, Arduino Edge Control is perfect for managing agriculture applications.

> The application note shown is intended to replicate a scale smart farming application, that can be implemented on real agriculture fields using the same hardware and firmware.

Reviewer 3: Juli to recheck

> The application note shown is intended to replicate a scale smart farming application, that can be implemented on real agriculture fields using the same hardware and firmware.

Reviewer 3: tricky one

let's accept PM one and study this further in the future

## Goals

> The goal of this application note is to showcase a smart farming irrigation system using a combination of an Edge Control, an MKR WiFi 1010, and the Arduino IoT Cloud. The project's objectives are the following:

Reviewer 3: nice catch

> The goal of this application note is to showcase a smart farming irrigation system using a combination of an Edge Control, an MKR WiFi 1010, and the Arduino IoT Cloud. The project's objectives are the following:

Reviewer 3: Not the most important one but it looks like the "an" is correct in this case

Remember, and this is tricky for sure, that it matters the pronunciation, not the actual letter.

So in this case that M it is pronounced with "em" which means we have to use "an"

Grammarly suggest the use of "an" but to double check I've been researching a little bit, a good explanation:

https://www.britannica.com/dictionary/eb/qa/how-do-you-know-whether-to-use-a-or-an#:~:text=Answer,begins%20with%20a%20vowel%20sound.

The last example serves to illustrate this point:

"an MBA degree (MBA begins with the consonant letter M, but the M is pronounced with its letter name, "em.")"

So let's keep the "an"

- Arduino Edge Control
- Arduino MKR WiFi 1010
- Arduino Edge Control Enclosure Kit
- Differential pressure Liquid Level Sensor - 4-20 mA (0-1 meter) Submersible.
- 2-Wires Motorized ball Valves (3-Wires version are also supported) (x4)
- 12 VDC power supply (x1)
- 3.4 meters of 15 mm PVC pipes (x1)
- 15 mm PVC TEE pipes (x3)
- 15 mm PVC elbow (x8)
- 15 mm Manual Valve (x1)
- 15 mm PVC caps (x4)
- 15 mm PVC male adapters (x11)
- 15 mm wall pipe brackets (x7)
- Rectangular planters (x4)
- DIN rail (x1)
- Cable glands (x6)
- 6 meters of duplex cable AWG 18 (x1)
- Electrical Register Box (x1)
- Water Tank (x1)

### Software Requirements

- [Arduino IDE 1.8.10+](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software), [Arduino IDE 2](https://www.arduino.cc/en/software), or [Arduino Web Editor](https://create.arduino.cc/editor).
- If you are going to use an offline Arduino IDE, you must install the following libraries: `Arduino_EdgeControl`, `ArduinoIoTCloud`, `Arduino_JSON`, `ArduinoJson`, `ArduinoHttpClient` and `Arduino_ConnectionsHandler`. You can install them using the Arduino IDE Library Manager.
- The [Smart Irrigation System Arduino Sketches](assets/Edge-Control_MKR_Codes.zip).

> - [Arduino Create Agent](https://create.arduino.cc/getting-started/plugin/welcome) to add the MKR WiFi 1010 to the Arduino IoT Cloud.

Reviewer 3: To take note this is something we should think about.

I don't think our users really know that we use the term provision to connect the system to the cloud.

The electrical connections of the intended application are shown in the diagram below:

![Electrical connections of the irrigation system](assets/wiring-diagram.png)

- The Edge Control board will be powered with an external 12 VDC power supply connected to BATT+ and GND of J11 respectively.

![Connecting the power supply](assets/edge-control_power_supply.png)

- The four motorized ball valves will be connected to the Edge Control Latching outputs of J9 connector from OUT0 to OUT6. 

![2-Wires valve and 4-20 mA sensor connection detail](assets/valve-connection.png)
***You can also use 3-Wires motorized valves without any changes in the code. See this [guide](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/edge-control/motorized-ball-valve) for reference.***

- The water level transmitter will be connected to the +19 V reference and the 4-20 mA input number one of the J7 connector.

![Project physical connections](assets/connections-labeled_16-9.png)

## Smart Irrigation System Overview

The irrigation system works as a whole, integrating the level measurement and the activation of the valves by the Edge Control, together with the communication with the cloud using the MKR WiFi 1010.

> The Edge Control is responsible for keeping track of the time with its integrated real-time clock (RTC), in order to schedule the use of the valves and know when a day has passed. In addition, it measures the level of the stored water with a 4-20 mA liquid level transmitter to calculate its use. It controls at the same time an LCD screen where the status of the valves and timers is shown. Manual control of the valves it is also possible using the LCD push button.

Reviewer 3: thanks :) 

accepted

> To communicate the system with the cloud, the MKR WiFi 1010 serves as a bridge. It notifies the Edge Control of any changes in the cloud to activate, deactivate or configure a timer to control the valves. In addition, it reports the values of the Edge Control sensors to the cloud. The communication between both devices is done using the I2C communication protocol.

Reviewer 3: I will accept the on to keep consistency

![Smart irrigation system with Edge Control](assets/project-setup.png)

### Valves Control

If a valve is activated from the cloud, the message "opening valve" will appear on the screen at the same time that it's being opened. If the valve is activated by a cloud timer, the display will show the same message, including a countdown of the remaining irrigation time. The working time of the valves is reported to the cloud for a visualization of the average daily use.

### Water Usage

> At every system startup the current amount of water is measured and saved. This way any decrease in it is considered as used. The use of water is daily reset to have an average daily use graph in the cloud.

Reviewer 3: Great revamp <3

accepted

### Weather Forecast Consideration

> The system is capable of knowing the weather thanks to the use of the MKR WiFi 1010 and the OpenWeather API. If the probability of rain is greater than 90%, the automatic watering timers will be ignored. However, it will be possible to continue watering manually if the user so wishes.

Reviewer 3: accepted, much better

### Arduino Edge Control Code

> We will go through some important code sections to make this application fully operative. We will begin with the required libraries:

Reviewer 3: Just realized we have an undesired repetition in both cases:

```suggestion
Let's go through some important code sections to make this application fully operative; starting with the required libraries:
```

this should solve the problem

Using flow control variables we store the initial water level as a reference point. Any level measured below that point will be considered as water used updating the `water_usage` variable. If we refill the tank, it will save the higher value of water level as a new reference point.

```arduino
  water_level = vals->water_level_local;
  water_volume = PI * (radius) * (radius) * ((int)water_level/100) * 1000;

  if (waterCtrl == 0) {
    currentWater = water_volume;
    Serial.println("Initial Water Volumen: ");
    Serial.println(currentWater);
    water_usage = 0;
    waterCtrl = 1;
  }

  if (water_volume < currentWater) {
    water_usage += currentWater - water_volume;
    currentWater = water_volume;
  } else if (water_volume > currentWater) {
    currentWater = water_volume;
  }
```

### The Arduino IoT Cloud Dashboard

Taking advantage of the Arduino IoT Cloud, its possible to seamlessly integrate a simple but powerful dashboard to monitor and visualize the status of the system in real-time, resulting in a professional Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) as can be seen below:

![Arduino Cloud project dashboard ](assets/dashboard_16-9.png)

> Within the Arduino IoT Cloud's dashboard, the system variables can be monitored and controlled. There are temperature, humidity and rain probability gauges showing the current weather status and forecast, toggle switches to control each motorized valve accompanied by a scheduler widget to set automatic irrigation routines, also time series graphs showing the daily activated time of each valve. Finally, there are water supply monitoring widgets, one that shows the current water level in percentage from 0-100%, a water volume widget that shows the remaining liters of water in the tank, and a water usage widget that shows the liters used daily.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Within the Arduino IoT Cloud's dashboard, the system variables can be monitored and controlled as follow:
- Temperature, humidity and rain probability are displayed in gauges, showing the current weather status and forecast.
- Each motorized valve can be toggled through a dedicated switch accompanied by a scheduler widget to set automatic irrigation routines.
- Each valve activated time is shown in a time series chart. 
- Water consumption can be monitored in dedicated widgets: one that shows the current water level in percentage from 0-100%, a water volume widget that shows the remaining liters of water in the tank and a water usage widget that shows the daily consumed liters.

```

![Arduino Cloud project dashboard on a smartphone](assets/dashboard-cel.png)

The dashboard can be easily accessible from a PC, mobile phone or tablet from anywhere, receiving an instantaneous update wherever we are.

## Full Smart Irrigation System Example

All the necessary files to replicate this application note can be found below:

- The complete code can be downloaded [here](assets/Edge-Control_MKR_Codes.zip).

### The Irrigation System Working

Below you can find some additional images and animations showing how the system works:

![Zone one manual irrigation](assets/manual-irrigation.png)
![Automatic irrigation timer countdown in zone two (1.4 minutes left)](assets/timer-LCD.png)
![Zone two after the motorized valve is opened](assets/zone2.png)
![Irrigation in all zones](assets/4zones.gif)

## Conclusion

In this application note, we have learned how to build a smart irrigation system to water our crops automatically, manually and remotely. Thanks to real-time weather analysis, we can avoid irrigation when it's raining saving water and avoiding over-irrigation or flooding problems. 

> Arduino Edge Control allows us to easily implement this kind of agriculture systems ready for field deployment. It is known that normally in remote areas Wi-Fi® access is limited by its use is increasing in the creation of new smart farms and the connectivity can be extended using alternatives boards like the Arduino MKR Lora board.  

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Arduino Edge Control allows you to easily implement this kind of agriculture systems ready for field deployment. However, if Wi-Fi® access is limited in your area, the connectivity can be extended using alternative boards, like the [Arduino MKR WAN 1310](https://docs.arduino.cc/hardware/mkr-wan-1310).  
```

Reviewer 3: thanks for the link to tthe right product :)

reminder for myself: about however expressions

> Thanks to the Edge Control capabilities to connect to the cloud and be remotely controlled, the Arduino Pro product series is a great choice for developing robust and industrial environment-proof solutions.

Reviewer 3: better agriculture

accepted

### Next Steps

> As you already know how to develop a Smart Irrigation System with Arduino Edge Control and the MKR WiFi 1010, it's time for you to continue exploring all the capabilities of the Arduino Pro environment to integrate it with your professional setup and improve it with powerful solutions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Since you already know how to develop a Smart Irrigation System with Arduino Edge Control and the MKR WiFi 1010, it is time for you to continue exploring all the capabilities of the Arduino Pro portfolio and integrating it in your professional setup.
```

> You can add different connectivity modules like LoRaWAN®, GSM, RS-485 or Ethernet by using the [Arduino MKR family](https://store-usa.arduino.cc/collections/mkr-family)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can extend the capabilities of your Edge Control-based system by adding different connectivity options, leveraging the [Arduino MKR family](https://store-usa.arduino.cc/collections/mkr-family) like LoRaWAN®, GSM, RS-485 or Ethernet.
```
